Dapr for .NET Developers - Chapter 6 (#21850)
dotnet/docs: docs/architecture/dapr-for-net-developers/serviceinvocation.md

![gRPC and HTTP/REST calls in eShopOnContainers](./media/service-invocation/eshoponcontainers.png)

**Figure 6-2**. gRPC and HTTP/REST calls in eShopOnContainers.

Note the steps from the previous figure:

1. The front-end calls the [API Gateway](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/architecture/microservices/design/gateway) using HTTP/REST.

1. The API Gateway forwards simple [CRUD](https://www.sumologic.com/glossary/crud/) (Create, Read, Update, Delete) requests directly to a core back-end service using HTTP/REST.

1. The API Gateway forwards complex requests that involve coordinated calls to multiple back-end services to the Web Shopping Aggregator service.

1. The aggregator service uses gRPC to call core back-end services.

In the recently updated eShopOnDapr implementation, Dapr sidecars are added to the services and API Gateway. Figure 6-3 show the updated architecture:

> ![gRPC and HTTP/REST calls in eShopOnContainers](./media/service-invocation/eshopondapr.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![gRPC and HTTP/REST calls in eShopOnDapr](./media/service-invocation/eshopondapr.png)
```

Fix duplicated alt-text

    {
        return _daprClient.InvokeMethodAsync(
            DaprAppId,
            "api/v1/basket",
            currentBasket,
            new HttpInvocationOptions
            {
                Headers = new Dictionary<string, string>
                {
                    [HeaderNames.Authorization] = accessToken
                }
            });
    }

    // ...
}
```

There is no need to explicitly specify the HTTP method for this POST call as `Post` is the default value of `HttpInvocationOptions.Method`.

## Summary

In this chapter, you learned about the service invocation building block. You saw how to invoke remote methods both by making direct HTTP calls to the Dapr sidecar, and by using the Dapr .NET SDK.

The eShopOnDapr reference architecture shows how the original eShopOnContainers solution is modernized by using Dapr service invocation. Adding Dapr to eShop provides benefits such as automatic retries, message encryption using mTLS, and improved observability.

### References

- [Dapr service invocation building block](https://docs.dapr.io/developing-applications/building-blocks/service-invocation/)

> - [Monitoring distributed cloud-native applications](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/architecture/cloud-native/observability-patterns)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Monitoring distributed cloud-native applications](../../cloud-native/observability-patterns)
```

Use relative paths where possible, also we cannot have locales in URLs.

>[!div class=“step-by-step”]
>[Previous](~index.md~)

> >[Next](~index.md~)

Reviewer: There are build warnings, where the file ~index.md~ cannot be resolved. Let's fix these two please.

Author: I've commented out the page navigation section for now. We'll push a separate PR to make filenames consistent and fix navigation across all chapters.

- Step #4: Service B executes the request and returns a response back to its sidecar.

- Step #5: The Service B sidecar forwards the response back to the
 service A sidecar.

- Step #6: The service A sidecar returns the response back to service A.

Because the calls flow through sidecars, Dapr can inject some useful cross-cutting behaviors:

- Automatically retry calls upon failure.
- Make calls between services secure with mutual (mTLS) authentication, including automatic certificate rollover.
- Control what operations clients can do using access control policies.
- Capture traces and metrics for all calls between services to provide insights and diagnostics.

Any application can invoke a Dapr sidecar by using the native **invoke** API built into Dapr:

``` http
http://localhost:<daprPort>/v1.0/invoke/<applicationid>/method/<methodname>
```

> The Dapr native APIs enable any application stack that supports HTTP or gRPC to consume Dapr services.

In the following example, we use *curl* to call the `catalog/items` 'GET' endpoint of `Service B`:

``` curl
curl http://localhost:3500/v1.0/invoke/serviceb/method/catalog/items
```

> In the next section, we'll use the .NET SDK to simplify service invocation calls.

Author: Changed to `In the next section, you'll learn how to use the .NET SDK to simplify service invocation calls.`

> ### Using the .NET SDK

Reviewer 2: Help us understand why? For me, "Use the" doesn't read as well as "Using the".  The "using" gives a sense of action.

The Dapr [.NET SDK](https://github.com/dapr/dotnet-sdk) provides .NET developers with an intuitive and language-specific way to interact with Dapr.
The .NET `DaprClient` class can be used for most interactions.

> Calling the `InvokeMethodAsync` method from `DaprClient` invokes a  method on a remote service. The following example submits an order by calling the `order/submit` method of the `orderservice` application:

Reviewer 2: Like this a lot.

``` csharp
var result = await daprClient.InvokeMethodAsync<Order, SubmitOrderResult>(
    "orderservice", "order/submit", order);
```

The third argument, an `order` object, is serialized internally (with `System.Text.JsonSerializer`) and sent as the request payload. The .NET SDK takes care of the call to the sidecar. It also deserializes the response to a `SubmitOrderResult` object.

You can also use `InvokeMethodWithResponseAsync` or `InvokeMethodRawAsync` to invoke a remote method. These specialized methods provide you with direct access to response headers and raw response bytes, respectively.

With the Dapr .NET SDK, your service can call another service via HTTP/REST or gRPC. For HTTP-based services, the `HttpExtension` class provides access to common HTTP properties:

- HTTP Verb: (`POST`, `GET`, `PUT`, `PATCH`, and `DELETE`). The default verb is `POST`.
- ContentType: The content-type of the HTTP request, such as `application/json`.
- QueryString: A collection of query string parameters.
- Headers: A collection of HTTP request headers.

> As an example, consider a call to following HTTP endpoint:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As an example, consider a call to the following HTTP endpoint:
```

> Architecturally speaking, calls between sidecars have the highest opportunity for system performance gain. In real-world scenarios, sidecars often are located on different machines.

> Note that the Service Invocation building block acts as a bridge between protocols. Calls to and from the sidecars support gRPC or HTTP protocols. Therefore, services can communicate with each other using HTTP, gRPC or a combination of both.

The eShopOnDapr reference application benefits from the Dapr Service Invocation building block. The features include service discovery, automatic mTLS, and observability.

### Forward HTTP requests using Envoy and Dapr

Both the original and updated eShop application leverage the [Envoy proxy](https://www.envoyproxy.io/) as an API Gateway. Envoy is an open-source proxy and communication bus that is popular across modern distributed applications. Originating from Lyft, Envoy is owned and maintained by the [Cloud-Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/).

> In the original eShopOnContainers implementation, the Envoy proxy gateway forwarded incoming HTTP requests directly to aggregator or back-end services. In the new eShopOnDapr, the Envoy proxy forwards request to a Dapr sidecar. The sidecar provides service invocation, mTLS, and observability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the original eShopOnContainers implementation, the Envoy proxy gateway forwarded incoming HTTP requests directly to aggregator or back-end services. In the new eShopOnDapr, the Envoy proxy forwards the request to a Dapr sidecar. The sidecar provides service invocation, mTLS, and observability.
```

Envoy is configured using a YAML definition file to control the proxy's behavior. To enable Envoy to forward HTTP requests to a Dapr sidecar container, we added a `dapr` cluster to the configuration. The cluster configuration contains a host that points to the HTTP port upon which the Dapr sidecar is listening:

``` yaml
clusters:
- name: dapr
  connect_timeout: 0.25s
  type: strict_dns
  hosts:
  - socket_address:
    address: 127.0.0.1
    port_value: 3500
```

We then updated the Envoy routes configuration to rewrite incoming requests as calls to the Dapr sidecar (pay close attention to the `prefix_rewrite` key-value pair):

``` yaml
- name: "c-short"
  match:
    prefix: "/c/"
  route:
    auto_host_rewrite: true
    prefix_rewrite: "/v1.0/invoke/catalog-api/method/"
    cluster: dapr
```

Consider a scenario where the front-end client wants to retrieve a list of catalog items. The Catalog API provides an endpoint for getting the catalog items:

``` csharp
[Route("api/v1/[controller]")]

> [ApiController]

Reviewer 2: Double check to make sure attributes can be concatenated.

> [ApiController]

Reviewer 2: Hmm... On second look, concatenating makes less intuitive.  Have to stop and look at it twice to see what is going on. Keeping separate attributes makes is extremely easy to follow, especially for newer developers.

> [ApiController]

Author: Agree with Robert; keeping attributes separate for readability.

public class CatalogController : ControllerBase
{

>     ...

Reviewer 2: But, thinking whatever we remove for brevity will still allow the code to build?

    [HttpGet]

>     [Route("items")]

Author: You're right, will change this to `[HttpGet("items")]`

```
GET http://localhost/api/v1/catalog/items?pageSize=20
```

> Note how calls made to the Envoy Proxy gateway use native Dapr HTTP calls and not the Dapr .NET SDK.

### Make aggregated service calls using the .NET SDK

Most calls from the eShop front-end are simple CRUD calls. The API gateway forwards them to a single service for processing. Some scenarios, however, require multiple back-end services to work together to complete a request. For these more complex calls, eShop uses the Web Shopping Aggregator service to mediate the workflow across multiple services. Figure 6-4 show the processing sequence of adding an item to your shopping basket:

![Update basket sequence diagram](./media/service-invocation/updatebasket.png)

**Figure 6-4**. Update shopping basket sequence.

Note how the aggregator service first retrieves catalog items from the Catalog API. It then validates items availability and pricing. Finally, the aggregator service saves the updated shopping basket by calling the Basket API.

> Let's look at some code. The aggregator service contains a `BasketController` that provides an endpoint for updating the shopping basket:

Reviewer 2: Hmm....  Thinking the "Let's look at some code" presents an important transition for the reader - moving from concept to code. Maybe take it out of the 3rd person and use something like, "Here is a code example that demonstrates <blah>."

``` csharp
[Route("api/v1/[controller]")]
[Authorize]

> [ApiController]

Reviewer 2: Politley disagree :). First, we're missing brackets in the above. But, more importantly, propose we as separate attributes to make more readeable.

public class BasketController : ControllerBase
{
    private readonly ICatalogService _catalog;
    private readonly IBasketService _basket;

    ...

    [HttpPost]

>     [HttpPut]

Reviewer 2: Same.

>     [HttpPut]

Reviewer 2: This concatenation might be Ok. As the Http verbs are simple and concatenating them is still easily readable.

>     [HttpPut]

Author: I'm keeping the attributes separate for consistency, but will change `...` to `// ...`

After receiving a request to update the basket, the aggregator service calls the Catalog API to get the item details. The Basket controller uses an injected `ICatalogService` object to make that call and communicate with the Catalog API. The original implementation of the interface used gRPC to make the call. We changed the implementation to use Dapr service invocation:

``` csharp
public class CatalogService : ICatalogService
{
    private const string DaprAppId = "catalog-api";

    private readonly DaprClient _daprClient;

    public CatalogService(DaprClient daprClient)
    {
        _daprClient = daprClient;
    }

    public async Task<IEnumerable<CatalogItem>> GetCatalogItemsAsync(
        IEnumerable<int> ids)
    {
        return await _daprClient.InvokeMethodAsync<IEnumerable<CatalogItem>>(
            DaprAppId,
            "api/v1/catalog/items",
            new HTTPExtension
            {
                QueryString = new Dictionary<string, string>
                {
                    ["ids"] = string.Join(",", ids),
                },
                Verb = HTTPVerb.Get
            });

>     }

Author: Async/await is necessary here because `_daprClient.InvokeMethodAsync` returns `ValueTask` whereas the `GetCatalogItemsAsync` must return `Task` (don't want to break pre-existing interfaces in eShop). An alternative would be to use the `AsTask()` method of `ValueTask`, which I also think is a bit confusing for less experienced developers. Anyway, I've opened an issue on the Dapr .NET SDK repo to replace `ValueTask` with `Task` because I don't think the use of `ValueTask` is beneficial in this case. If that proposal is accepted, I can remove the async/await from this code sample.

>     ...

Author: I'm leaving `// ...` in the bottom of the class to indicate that there's more content in the class in the accompanying sample than is shown here.

}
```

Note how we use the `HTTPExtension` object to pass the query string and HTTP verb details to the Catalog API.

The other call made by the aggregator service is to the Basket API. It only allows authorized requests. We pass the access token along in an *Authorization* request header to ensure the call succeeds:

``` csharp
public class BasketService : IBasketService
{
    private const string DaprAppId = "basket-api";

    ...

> 

Author: Removed

    public Task UpdateAsync(BasketData currentBasket, string accessToken)
    {
        return _daprClient.InvokeMethodAsync(
            DaprAppId,
            "api/v1/basket",
            currentBasket,
            new HTTPExtension
            {
                Headers = new Dictionary<string, string>
                {
                    [HeaderNames.Authorization] = accessToken
                }
            });

>     }

Reviewer 2: Great suggestion.

>     }

Author: I don't think we need to use a case insensitive dict here (the official Dapr documentation also uses a plain `new Dictionary<string, string>`. The only thing that happens to this dictionary once passed to the Dapr InvokeMethodAsync call is that the key/values are read and passed as metadata in a gRPC call. There will never be other keys added to it, nor will it be searched for specific keys.

    ...
}
```

> We don't need to explicitly specify the HTTP verb for this POST call as `POST` is the default value of `HTTPExtension.Verb`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no need to explicitly specify the HTTP verb for this POST call as `POST` is the default value of `HTTPExtension.Verb`.
```

Author: Done

## Summary

> In this chapter, we introduced the Service Invocation building block. We showed how to invoke remote methods both by making direct HTTP calls to the Dapr sidecar, and by using the Dapr .NET SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this chapter, the service invocation building block was introduced. You saw how to invoke remote methods both by making direct HTTP calls to the Dapr sidecar, and by using the Dapr .NET SDK.
```

Reviewer 2: Understand the need to remove "we." but wonder if sentence is now passive with "was introduced?"

Maybe, "In this chapter, you learned about about the 'blah'. You saw how to invoke 'blah'

Author: Rewritten to remove "we", but keeping things active
